# DV1583 Degree Project
Synthetic Data Augmentation for Intrusion Detection:
Evaluating WGAN-GP for Class Imbalance and Novel Attack Detection

# Aims & Objectives

The aim of the experiment is to evaluate whether synthetic data generated by WGAN-GP can be used
to alleviate class imbalances often observed in network flow data, and whether synthetic data
augmentation can improve downstream classification and improve detection rates for previously unseen
attacks.


To achieve this aim, the study is structured as a comparative evaluation between two classification
pipelines. Both pipelines are identical in architecture, preprocessing steps, feature selection, and
selection of classification ensemble, with the only difference being that one pipeline will have an
augmented dataset through the synthetic data generated by WGAN-GP. Each pipeline will be evaluated
on the same metrics: classification report, calibration plots, ROC-AUC, and withheld labels detection
rate. This makes it so that any differences observed between the two evaluations can be attributed to the
inclusion of synthetic data. The objectives for this study are thus:

* Generate synthetic network flow data using WGAN-GP for selected attack labels
* Evaluate the fidelity of synthetic data using various fidelity metrics to ensure realism and
utility downstream
* Assess the impact of synthetic data using various evaluation metrics to ensure performance
in classifying malicious network traffic
* Investigate whether synthetic data improved detection of previously withheld attack labels

The study aims to answer the following research questions:

* RQ1: Does synthetic data generated with WGAN-GP improve downstream classification
performance in intrusion detection systems?

* RQ2: Does the inclusion of high-quality synthetic network flow data improve detection of
previously unseen, rare, and novel attack types?

# Dependencies (Packaged in a Conda environment):
  - python=3.12
  - numpy[version='<2']
  - ipykernel
  - seaborn
  - tqdm
  - matplotlib
  - pandas
  - jupyter
  - scipy
  - torchaudio
  - pytorch
  - torchvision
  - pytorch-cuda=11.8
  - scikit-learn
  - joblib
  - xgboost

  Experiments run on Windows 11, GPU: Nvidia GeForce 3060 TI, CPU: Ryzen 5 5600X

# Acknowledgements
WGAN-GP implementation largely based on implementation by Gulrajani et al. (https://arxiv.org/abs/1704.00028, https://github.com/igul222/improved_wgan_training) and Zeleni9 (https://github.com/Zeleni9/pytorch-wgan)